From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 564. In this
episode, Scott talks with Mina
Markham about building the Hillary
Clinton UI pattern library known
as Penn suit. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hanselminutes today.
I'm talking with Mina Markham.
She worked at Hillary for
America. She organized the front
porch conference. She's worked at
IBM design and all over,
how are you? I'm doing
great. How are you doing?
And I'm very happy to
be talking with you. I
found out about you when
I was looking at your
UI pattern library. You built
a, a design system, but
not just a design system.
You build a presidential design
system for then candidate Hillary
Clinton. Yes, I did. It
was a lot of funnels.
Actually. The first project I
did when I started working
there and it was the
longest spanning project. I did
it the entire time I
was there. So over the
span of like 18 months,
I worked on two separate
versions of this pattern library
Is that work. Like someone
comes up with a, you
know, when you have all
these at the time, there
were all these different presidential
candidates and there's all these
logo designers, but like, is
there some designer that comes
up with like the language
that you're going to use?
Or were you part of
the language, the Hillary Clinton
language team, or how did
Well, there were two different
versions of pantsuit that the
library for each different of
versions of the site that
we launched a main site,
Hillary clinton.com. When the campaign
originally launched back in April, 2015,
the site had one kind
of look and I was
charged with sort of retrofitting
and retro, like committing a
pattern library based on the
excite as it existed. So
I had to take a
design that was already in
place by people who were
no longer working on the
project and figure out a
way to make a reusable
system out of something that
already existed for the second
version of the site. I
actually worked with our designer,
our lead, one of our
lead visual designers, Victor, and
he redesigned Hillary clinton.com. And
based on the redesign, I
was also redoing the library
at the same time. So
he and I worked pretty
closely together to make sure
that the library I was
creating directly reflected his designs
and we would update each
acne B. So with a
lot of like rapid iteration
and a lot of like
payer design and coding happening,
Political campaigns have more than
just like one website, right?
They have different entry points
and different other mini sites
and things like that is
that That's correct. At least
for us, we had the
main site, which was the.com
and that was that hosted
art, the home page and
state specific pages, policy pages
and our blog and content
driven pages underneath the umbrella
of Hillary clinton.com. We had
other platforms and apps like
our donations platform, which was
a separate code base, our
event RSVP platform, which again,
a separate code base. We
had one off sites for
things like our fact checker
that we did for debates.
And we had policy driven.
Micro-sites like the college calculator
or some policy picker where
you can pick the kind
of policies that the issues
that were important to you.
And it would lay out
like your platform as presented
by Hillary Clinton. So we
had like a lot of
different apps all under the.hillerman.com.
So it's almost, I mean,
when you, when you're saying
a platform like there, the
candidate is off figuring out
their platform and you're building
a platform, that's a visual
platform to build literally everything
up on top of that.
Yeah. As the candidate herself
was building out her policy
platform, we were updating the
site to reflect both the
policies and basically what you're
trying to make sure that
everything on the site was
reflecting the message and the
vision of the candidate herself.
So it was a lot
of like rapid fire, like
updates, whenever something needed to
be changed. A lot of
the people who are listening
are designers. Let me ask
a couple of maybe dumb
questions and you'll please forgive
me. If, if I do,
why can't you do something
like, I don't know, one
big CSS file. And we
all just include that. Like
when does it, when does
a solution like this go
from being, eh, just include
this, you know, super-duper dot
CSS and that'll handle everything
versus it becomes a system.
The reason we wanted to
do a system was because
we had so many different
individual like products and different
projects under different COVID basis,
no one ever needed all
of the library that I
made, no one ever used,
every single thing that was
in it. So in the
interest of making sure that
our, our front end code
was lightweight as possible and
our sides were as fast
as possible. We built a
system that our people could
just take the parts of
it that they needed as
opposed to taking absolutely everything
that was there. It bolted
in. And one, our engineers
were able to move a
lot faster cause they could
just like take some button
styles out or just take
some styles out for headlines
and things, just the parts
they needed and leave the
rest out of it. Okay.
So this is a lot
more modular it's it is
overly what I described is
very simplistic for, for a
system that is this big.
Yeah. Because it has, I,
there was way to anticipate
how it was going to
be used. I had to
create something that could be
used in effective isolation, like
ed, to be able to
take any one part of
it and plug it into
any kind of code base
and have it work and
not have to do a
lot of like tweaking and
a lot of like extra
coding on top of it,
just because of the pace
that we were developing at.
And you based the core
architecture on this concept that
I've not heard of before
called it CSR. Yes, I
did. It's a concept that
Harry Roberts he's called by CSS.
Wizardry came up with this
brilliant system where it, a
lot of times when you
write CSS, you kind of
almost work against the principle
of the cascade of it.
You try to fight the
CSF. Cause Steve has naturally
like inherit styles from the
top down to the bottom.
And sometimes when you're writing
it, you almost go against
that principle. Whereas with ITC
assess the ideas that you
start off with a really
broad scale, really grand styles,
and you narrowly get more
specific and more narrow as
you go down and your
style sheets. So at the
end, you're left with very
specific, like a clot where's
this class with that handle
like one particular property at
one particular declaration. And at
the very top of it,
you'll have things that go
where you have like your
box sizing or your styles
on like the HTML pack
and like the, the, the
main tags there. So it's,
I really liked that principle
because it, it, it lends
itself well to modularity, but
also a limited self to
like, not writing a lot
of like overtly specific CSS
and a lot of like
bloated code, because you weren't
effectively trying to undo something
you did before. It seems
like from a layman's perspective
that there's a, it applies
rigor to something that I
personally as kind of not
a designer, I just hacked
CSS together. I've never applied
that level of kind of
rigor or formality to, to
my CSS. This is a
whole framework within which like
a name is, it's a
naming convention. It's a way
to focus your, your classes
and their purpose and their
scope. Yeah. I try to
do that as much as
possible because what I've discovered
is that a lot of
people, even a lot of
fun developers who do more
JavaScript and more like logic
oriented things, they kind of,
don't like writing CSS because
they've gotten used to the
idea that it's kind of
haphazard and it's very easily
to, it's very easy to
like things to get to
break very easily. And I
was out, I've kind of
figured out that that's because
people tend to write the
CSS, mimicking the HTML structure
and they kind of type
tightly coupled the two so
that if you change one,
you end up having to
change the other or something
might break. So the principle
behind using something like PCSs
and using really great naming
conventions is to make it
so that your, your CSS
file. One is easily. Human
is easily read by human.
We use naming conventions that
if you look at the
name of the class, you
could pretty easily tell what
the styles are, what that
class purpose is. I guess
I try to name my
classes in a way that
if you saw the name
of the class, you can
know what exactly it is
was referencing. But also I
wanted to be able to
remove the styles from the
structure of the page, so
that if you happen to
move around your markup a
little bit, you, you weren't,
you didn't have to go
back and then rewrites and
CSS, it should just work.
And I found that, especially
when we were working in
a very rapid fire environment,
like the, like the campaign
was it's less work, you
can do the better. So
being able to just change
classes, move around classmates and
not have like, redo all
of your HTML structure or
vice versa, like it made
it so that there was
a lot of, like, there
wasn't a lot of lifting
to get started or what
my lifting to change your
styles. And when you're putting
together a site that's going
to get, you know, I
assume, you know, tens of
millions, if not hundreds of
millions of hits, you're going
to want to hit everybody.
And it's going to have
to be really, really inclusive.
So does this work like,
is it, is it accessible,
accessible? Is it compliant with
all the things for screen
readers and low vision and
all those kinds of things?
Yeah. I tried to make
the site as compliant as
possible, because like you said,
it's particularly when you're applying
to work at the highest
office of the land, like
you want to make sure
you can reach everyone. Who's
attempting to find out more
information about you. So I
wanted to make sure I
remove as many barriers as
possible from being able to
access the site. And so
that included one, making sure,
like you said, that screen
readers could ask, could read
the site properly. And to
do that, I tried my
best to code every page
with the proper higher accuracy
of the pop and the
proper HTML tags so that
the screen readers would know
the hierarchy of the content.
It would be able to
better interpret what the content
meant. In addition to that
keyboard navigation was something I
tried to pay attention to.
There's a lot of people
who use keyboard only have,
are able to use a
mouse or whatnot. So they
use a lot of key.
I use keyboard navigation to
go around the site, and
I wanted to make sure
that if you were using
a top key or arrow
can get to go through
our site, you were able
to hit every single thing
you'd be able to hit.
You didn't get into any
traps where you weren't able
to access. Like for example,
our dropdown menu on navigation
are our main navigation. I
just want to make sure
that everything you be able
to get around the site
without much difficulty of the
same time when you're using
keyboard navigation, you want to
make sure that there's focus
States. So people know when
they're moving the key, when
they're moving the cursor with
the, you, they want, you
want to be able to
see where you are located
at any given time. Like
with the mouse, you're able
to tell where you're where
your mouse is. You can
see the cursor, but with
the, with the tab keys,
if you don't specifically style
focus States, you may not
always be able to tell
where you are on a
page. Funny thing is, is
that the browser does this
for you automatically. Like, it
just comes with focus days,
but lots of frameworks inadvertently
like remove that styling. And
some developers don't know that
they need to add that
back so that people are
able to see where they
are. So I worked with
our designer to make sure
that we specifically styled all
of our focus States so
that even though I removed
the default browser styles, because
I didn't, we didn't like
the way they looked. We've
made sure that we added
them back, that they matched
our brand and people could
still tap through and know
where they were. I see.
So there is, there is
the stuff that the browser
does by default. You removed
it because you didn't like
the look of it, but
you made sure that no,
no behaviors were removed. No
expectations were not in that
when someone did something like
tab over something. Yeah. And
it's, there's nothing wrong with
moving because I think the
like on a Mac anyway,
there's this like default, like
blue shadowy outline where you
tap over something and lots
of people don't necessarily like
that look, but just if
you're going to remove and
make sure that you've been
style that look appropriately, and
we did a separate style
between hover and focus States,
cause the, the gut reaction
is, well, I'll just style.
The hover States and the
focus stays the exact same,
that doesn't necessarily always work.
So we wanted to make
sure that when you were
tabbing versus hovering over something,
you would know the distinction
by being able to visually
see it. One important thing
that I, we had to
make sure we kept in
mind was holler contrast. A
lot of the times the
people think that just changing
the color of something is
enough of a visual indicator,
but lots of people are
color blind and are able
to perceive that shift in
color. So making sure that
you have some kind of
deep contrast thing, how our
pallets, so that they can
visually see the difference, even
if they can't see the
difference in color, they'll be
able to see the difference
in the shading. So keeping
stuff at mind like that,
where just making sure that
it's always visually, you're always
able to visually perceive the
difference in something, if, even
if it's all in black
and white. So this is
all very modern HTML, modern
CSS. This is this, does
this end up being one
big CSS file? Or are
you using a CSS library
that is generating CSS Several
like dozens of small CSS
files, actually the several small
sauce files. And I are
using a goal slash Webpack
based build system to all
of those files into one
main CSS file, which is
then included into the application.
That was for the main
site, because pantsy was also
used by things that were
outside prod products. I also
use that compile CSS now
the build system within publish
it to the CDN. And
so they would be able,
our engineers would be able
to just pull a link
off the CDN and include
it or any other application
they were using. So our
build system would take all
of my, like dozens of
small CSS files or excuse
me, sass files compiled into
one big CSS file and
then publish them both to
a internal NPM module that
you could then include insider
application or to the an
S three bucket for our
CDN. And then they could
pull it down with just
a link tag. So there's
two different ways that people
would consume pantsuit. Interesting. And
is it possible to test
something like this is maybe
a dumb question, but can
you test CSS without looking
at it, like the way
you unit test? Not really,
there's a thing called visual
regression test, which I never
fully implemented. Cause it just
was kind of out of
the scope of what I
was working on, but to
do something like testing CSS,
I really just do a
visual test. I would do
visual, be bugging using this
thing called pesticide, that IO,
which would essentially just add
an outline to every element
on the page. And you
can kind of see if
your layout is doing something
unexpected or kind of funky.
You can kind of, that
helps you to see what
is happening. But as far
as like automated tests for
CSS, the only thing I
would do is I would
Lynch my CSS based on
some linting rules that I
wrote. And it would just
help with the formatting of
the files itself, but it
didn't really like check to
see if it worked properly
or if it looked properly
with the SAS, with compiling,
if there was a missing
punctuation or something, the file
just wouldn't compile. So you
would notice it was broken
because the no CSS will
be loaded, but that's about
as far as it would
go, can you, could you
Bad CSS out, it would
make it all the way
out to production or like
you said, you'd catch some
of that in the linting
process and it would, it
would literally be, Yeah, I
kind of tested it really
rigorously, just visually speaking because
of that, because so many
different people were using the
finished product that I didn't
want to risk breaking anything
in production. So I did
pretty rigorous testing, just visual,
like testing just by looking
at it. That's about all
I could do. Also we
did version, we did some
for, for pantsuit so that
even if I happen to
cause every once in a
while I would get Annenberg,
we do push a broken
bill to prod, but I
would, it would be versions
so that no one would
actually, it never would make
it to the live site
unless went and manually Updated
that dependencies. So there was
a lot of different safeguards
to try not to push
broken CSS to the site.
But occasionally it happens. We're
saying this is a dumb
question, but I'm realizing that
on the front end, I
am really unfamiliar with how
things work. And when I
was doing CSS, you know,
many years ago when I
was writing my own before
CSS kind of became its
own practice, right. Where you
were, there were professional front
end engineers, right. There was
just so much less formality
to it. Your build system
is really rigorous and, and,
and integrated into the, the,
the build system of the
entire site. Right. I mean,
you're using a strongly typed
language like with SAS that's
catching things and allowing you
to do reuse it's it's
as similar as writing C
or C plus plus, I
mean, it's, it's pretty, pretty
serious stuff. Yeah. I, I
come from a design background.
I used to be a
designer and I S I
slowly Wade my way and
taught myself front end development
or front end engineering. So
I, I use SAS as
kind of like a, I
call it like a, I
guess they start a drug
or like a entryway drug
to program it's as has
a lot of like traditional
programming concepts within it. That
helped me more programming languages.
So it's, I've kind of
gotten, I've just started getting
used to writing CSS in
a way that is much
more, like, much more modular,
much more cleaner and just
more deliberate and just making
sure that I do things,
what I do things in
a way that they are
very intentional. And I just
try not to do anything
for you, but we have
hazard. Cause that's how a
lot of the frustrations with
the traditional frustration people have
with CSS, that's where they
come from is that if
people are a little bit
more haphazard with their name
and conventions or with their
styling, besides assignment logic and
things like that. Yeah, that's
very well said. I liked
that intentional and deliberate because
I know that when I
paid a designer to redesign
my blog, you know, it
was glorious and it was
organized and then I wanted
to change something, you know,
and I throw it at
the end, you know, and
now three years later, I'm
on version five and it's
10% garbage and 90% glorious.
And the garbage is entirely
my fault because I didn't
think about the pyramid and
the like, like you point
out the alterations of components
as it works its way
down the, or up the
pyramid, depending on how you
look at it. Yeah. And
like I said, the it
CSS that is really smart,
really well thought out methodology.
And I think that it
solves a lot of people's
with CSS and that it
helps you think about it
in much more deliberate fashion,
The build system. And it's
not just, you're not just
building the CSS and the
website, but one of the
things that, that separates a
style guide from just some
CSS is documentation. This is
a system like bootstrap is
a system. It is, there's
a whole series of documentation
behind this for people to
sit down and immediately become
productive. Yeah. That was part
of my deliberate deliverable when
I finished this project because
this system that I built
didn't really do anyone in
need go to, they didn't
know how to use it.
So I had to, I
kind of try to document,
as I would make this,
as I was building the
system, as I was building
components, I used this CSS
notation called I'm KSS node.
And what it would do
is it parses through comments
that I would make inside
my sass files and use
those comments to generate static
pages that were showcasing and
documenting the components I was
making. So it made it,
it had a twofold result
while the documentation itself lived
inside of the killer base.
So if someone was just
looking through the code base,
they would be able to
read the documentation that way,
but also it helped. It
helped me to kind of
automate the documentation of it
pretty metaphorically quickly, because whenever
I would make a change
inside of ACSS file, I
could quickly update the, the
comments next to it. And
I would have my occupation
just read, render, and update
that way. And one of
the things I heard from
my fellow engineers on the
team was that how well
documented this was. And it
really had the effect that
people were able to kind
of jump in and get
going very quickly. And they
didn't have to ask, combined
me to ask a lot
of, a lot of questions
about how to use it.
It was just kind of
there and it made it
so that our project, our
timelines move much, much faster.
Interesting. So a documentation syntax
for CSS. So it's embedded
within the comments within the
CSS itself. Yeah. I would
just write 'em in SAS
that are this thing called
silent comments where they, they
don't the comments themselves. Don't
get out, put it to
the actual compile CSS, but
they live inside the sass
files and this notation would
use those comments and generate
the HTML markup that was
needed to both present the,
the UI component. But also
it would spit out the
raw Marcos where people could
just copy and paste the
markup into their own app.
Okay, interesting. So then that
means that it's not just,
you know, taking some markdown
or some files as, you
know, some texts out of
comments, but you're actually seeing
the button next to the
here's the slide, here's the
style to use to get
that button. Yeah. It's, it's
actual, alive and living a
living and breathing style guide
where you can see and
interact with the components themselves,
as well as seeing the,
the markup, you would need
to recreate that in your
own app. So it was,
it had kind of a
twofold of showing people what
it should look like. So
if that, for whatever reason
they were using it and
it didn't look quite like
they were expecting, they could
kind of go back to
the documentation and see like
what happened and maybe figure
out where they went wrong.
But also it just, it
was a way for people
to like, just really kind
of see how these things
live outside of the context
of a larger app. Now
you organized a conference called
the front porch conference, kind
of a front end developer.
Yeah. I'm one of the
co-organizers Chris Williams. One of
my good friends down in
Dallas, he started the conference
and I helped him organize
two, two different years, not
last year. Cause obviously I
was a little preoccupied, but
I worked with him to
run this conference for two
different for two weeks, the
past two years. And yeah,
we just tried to build
a community in front of
developer community in Dallas and
kind of show that there
is this, this texting there
and we just wanted a
way to like, you know,
share knowledge and, you know,
promote what we were learning
to our fellow developers and
valves community. So where would
you, what would you say
to someone like me who,
Well, I know what HTML
is and I know what
CSS is. I know what
JavaScript is, but the, when
you call it front end
development and you talk to
me about things like KSS
and nunchucks and assemble and,
and, and I, I, my
brain starts to go, ah,
it's too much. And then
you add SAS and it's
like, well, I guess I'll
just keep hacking it together.
Where do I go to
if I'm not a designer,
but I want to understand
the world of the front
end developer to try to
get my head around this
because it's moving so fast.
So you're saying, where should
I direct? I would say
just what I learned was
I would read, I would
read a blog post and
read mainly CSS-Tricks honestly like
that kind of is what
got me really to understand
how CSS works. And it's
not, it doesn't just talk
about CSS talks about pretty
much everything to do with
front end. So that was
one place that I've gone
that I've, I've learned a
little bit, I've learned a
lot about how to do
front end development, but also
a front end is kind
of by default open source.
Cause you have, the browser
has to be able to
see the code, unlike, you
know, back in applications. I
have to be compiled on
the server. Like you can
have access to the CSS,
the HTML and the JavaScript
in your browser. So I,
how I got into is
I would just see something
cool on someone's website. I
would inspect the element. I
would view the source and
kind of just start to
dig in and see was
happening. So I just learned
by like playing around and
dissecting other people's code. So
I guess my, what I
would say is just, if
you see something, you like
try to dig into it
and figure out how it's
being done. So if I
see a CSS, you know,
system being used, I'm going
to see it in view
source and then really dig
into an Explorer and say,
well, you know, wow, this
site that I respect or
this company that I respect
is using library foo or
CSS style system bar, why
are they doing that? What
would the decisions behind it?
And then start exploring those
people's blogs. And I assume
they would talk about it
on places like CSS tricks.
Yeah. CSS-Tricks also a book
apart has a great series
of very small, like easily
digestible books about front end.
And they are geared towards
beginners and people who don't
necessarily know a lot about
the topic they're talking about.
So I think those books
are actually a really good
way to get the, to
get started learning a little
bit more about this and
it doesn't cut. They're so
small. They're very easy to
read. You can read them
in like a couple of
hours. And I think that
those, they actually help to
get you started. And they
don't require a lot of
like upfront, like diving in
and like commitment to it.
Now about a year ago
you made a GitHub project
and it's, I went to
your GitHub and it's, it's
so much greener than mine.
It has this lovely green
graph of all your contributions.
You made a project called
sassy starter. Is that a
good, That's a good place
to start if you want
to build like a static
site pretty quickly. Essentially, I
made that because I, when
I started creating new front
end projects, I would always
use a similar structure, a
similar like file system. And
I just wanted to not
have to create the same
thing multiple times. So I've
made it into a repo
and I put it up
there. I thought someone else
might enjoy it, but that's
probably, that's a good way
for you to get started.
It's like at the very
least you can see the
kind of way I structure
my CSS. Cause it includes
the file structure there for
you. So you can kind
of get an idea of
like how that, how that
is structured and also includes
a very simple, like gold
built systems. You can get
kind of get your feet
wet with how that particular
system might work. So yeah,
it's a very good place
to kind of like, just
start playing around with like
running code. Very cool. So
people can find you@meena.codes. M
I N a.codes. And from
there they can see you're
speaking, you've spoken all over.
They can see your work.
You're in New York now. Yeah.
I live in Brooklyn now.
Very cool. And you're available.
If people are looking for
a front end designer, who's
done big stuff with the
amazing technologies. I really appreciate
you taking the time to
chat with me today. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes and we'll see
you again next week. .